 Okay, so let's get started with the presuppositions. Now I just want to quickly remind you that the presuppositions aren't set in stone rules. These are not things that you need to consider that are absolutes, that are generalisations across the entire population of the entire world. These are guidelines. They are thoughts to have in your head as you're working with yourself or your clients that might just be true, but they might as easily be not. But they are a useful set of guidelines for working with people. They give you an idea of who that person might be and what their model of the world might be. And we're going to the very first one, which is the map is not the territory. Now what does that mean? Well, if you look at a map, if you get a paper map or if you look at a map on your tablet, your iPad or something, it will give you an idea of the road structure. You'll be able to follow the roads or it will show you the landscape from a point of view of it being flat and it will tell you, it will give you numbers about how high it is or where the undulations in the land lie. But all that is is a map. It doesn't actually show you the territory. If you look at a map of a hill, you get an idea of how steep it might be by the numbers showing you the level above sea level or something along those lines. But you don't actually know if it's a surface that's rocky, whether it's slippery, whether those rocks are solid and you can climb on or whether you step on them and they'll all fall. Is there water running down it making it slippery and slightly? Is it icy? Is it anything you just don't know what the territory is? And that is exactly the same for us as human beings. We see our model of the world through our own eyes and our own experiences. We have grown up from the day we were born inside ourselves, not inside anybody else. We have our own frame of experience. We know what we see, we hear, we feel, we taste, we smell, we know all of those. But our experiences are usually quite different to the experiences of other people because they've grown up completely differently. My best friend Mark, I can talk about, had a completely different upbringing to me. Now we see lots of things the same way, that's why we're best friends and we get on so well. However, his model of the world is completely different to mine. His map and his territory are different, they are not what they appear to be. His map for the world, it doesn't actually represent the reality of the world, sorry, it represents his form of reality. But my form of reality might just be a little bit different. My theories on it, my looking at it might just be a little bit different because of my experiences. Your experiences, since you were born, have been completely different to mine. So when you look at something, you may well look at it in a different way. When you hear something, you may well hear it in a different way compared to me. Now let me try and give you an example of that. If I was to say to you, you just didn't do that right, what's your reaction to it? Well, if there's a hundred people watching this clip at that exact point that you were watching it, there might have been 95 to 100 different reactions. Some people would have got, don't attack me, you're attacking me with that. Others might have had the reaction of, oh sorry, I didn't mean to do that, I'm sorry. It all depends on our experience and our experience is not the reality of the world, it's just the reality of our world. So our map is never the reality of the world and everybody has their own map, their own frame of experience on the world. So when a client comes to sit with you, understand that you need to remove your map of the world and do your best to understand theirs. And that's the first thing that every successful practitioner of any sort in the world will tell you. You have to understand the person in front of you. You need to understand their map, not the territory, not what you think is, not your map. You need to understand their map and we do that from asking questions and actively listening to what they're saying. But understand that when you're with a client, they have a different set of experiences to you. Their map is completely and utterly different to you. Even if they're your twin brother or twin sister, they have a different map of the world because they may have had the same upbringing or similar upbringing, but one experience to them may mean something different to you, to your experience. So twins can also see things completely differently. So even if you have a twin brother or twin sister, and I know twins share that bond, but they have a different set of experiences. So if twins can, friends can, and so can people you have no idea of. So always approach a client knowing that you need to understand their map of the world first and put your map of the world to the side. Okay, let's move on. Having choice is better than not having choice. Now to me, that's an obvious one. But to clients that come to you who are stuck in their world of whatever world that may be, they're stuck in a career or they're stuck in depression or they're stuck in anxiety or they're just stuck in their life, they're stuck in a relationship or they're stuck without a relationship, very often they think they don't have any choices. They think they have just got the one option and how you will hear the phrase no doubt very often, I just don't have a choice. Well actually we always have choice. We have a basic choice of whether to get out of bed in the morning or not. We have a basic choice of whether to take a drink when we're thirsty or just not bother, or eat when we're hungry or just not bother. We all have choices and having a choice is absolutely better than not. So as a practitioner, if you can help them to discover their choices, create some choices of their own, then you give them a better option of success, a better option of getting unstuck from where they are. So always remember if somebody comes to you and says I just don't have a choice or I don't have any options or I'm just stuck on this one path, it's time to open those paths up, find some other paths for them to walk down, give them other options and give them other choices and help them to create their other options and choices as well. And that kind of follows on to the next piece of position which is people make the best choice they can. They make the best choice they can with the information and the choices they have at the time. If they just feel like they have one choice then that's the only choice they can make and they choose it. If they feel like they have two choices then they choose which one they think works best for them at that point in time. Now it may not be the best one for them because they might have ten choices they can only see two, so they will only ever make the right choice, the best choice for them at the time. And if you're talking to a client and when you're talking to somebody and they say well you know I had the choice to do this or this and I chose this, if that was a terrible choice for them it may well have been better than the other choice they thought they had. You have to realise that, you can't go oh god what a thing to do, no! That would just be quite damaging to the coaching and NLP practitioner relationship if you did that. You have to understand that people take the best choice they can at the time because they might only think they have a couple of choices so it's a balancing act between well that one's okay that one's slightly better it's not great but I'll take it because that's the choice I have. So always remember that people make the best choice they can with the information and the options they've got at the time. And then finally for this video we can move on to presupposition number four. People work perfectly, they just have poor strategies and that's the truth. People do work perfectly, we're born as a clean slate, we're born with nothing, we're born where we can't even feed ourselves, get a drink for ourselves and actually we're born to a place of if we don't have physical human contact from another human being babies who are not cuddled by their mother or by a nurse or just given some sort of physical contact in the very early days can die. It's a medical proven scientific thing that babies die if they're not given physical contact. That's how blank we are when we're born. So we work perfectly as we grow, the thing is we just grow poor strategies. We might have a if we want to be happy but we have a pattern, a strategy inside us for feeling depressed we have a poor strategy. If we want to run a marathon but all we do all day is sit on the sofa and eat chocolate we have a poor strategy. If we want to see a sunrise but we continually look to the west when the sun rises in the east or at least it does in the UK, we have a poor strategy if we're looking west. People develop poor strategies because they take the best choice they can at the time. That choice may not be the best strategy for where they want to get to but it's the one they think they have at the time, the best one they think they have at the time. But if we can identify those strategies and don't worry there's plenty of work to come on that as we go through the course, when we identify the strategies we can then identify where those strategies need to change to get them to where they want to be. Okay so we're going to move on and in the next clip we're going to look at another four of the presuppositions. Come on, follow me over.