 Okay, so let's move into part two of the presuppositions. Now in this clip you're gonna hear the presupposition that I've been talking about that's probably the most questioned. So let's get to that one in a couple of minutes shall we? Let's start off though with all actions have a purpose. It doesn't matter what action we take in life, it has a purpose for us or for somebody else. The thing is we don't often know what that purpose is. We just go about life, we just follow through in life completely unconsciously. We get into our little routines, we get into our patterns and we just keep going. We don't really consciously think about the actions we're taking or particularly the purpose behind those actions. Is this something that you do on a regular basis that you suddenly think afterwards why did I do that again? Do you get into automatic pilot mode if you like, autopilot mode where you just go through the motions and you kind of get stuff done and afterwards you think why did I do that? Have you ever been driving a car and got in it and thought you need to go somewhere and when you've got there you've gone, how did I get here? I don't remember the journey. You were on automatic pilot. That's about living in an unconscious world. What we need to do and what you'll find throughout this course and I may have mentioned it already is that we need to bring things into our conscious mind. We need to be thinking about stuff consciously to make effective changes, to make the changes we want and for your clients to make the changes they want they have to be thinking consciously as well. They have to take conscious responsibility for their lives to make the changes. Okay are you ready? Here it comes. This is the most I, well I think the most discussed presupposition of any of these and that is that every behavior has a positive intent. Now I've heard all of the arguments by now, I'm sure I have, you may throw some more up, but people stand there and they say to me, Graham how can every behavior have a positive intent? What about criminals? What about people who commit murder or you know terrible terrible crimes? How can they have a positive intent? Slow down is what I say to them. Calm, slow down. Just remember for a moment that these presuppositions they're not rules, they are not set in stone guidelines, they are not what we live and die by, they are not even laws of the land. These are just rough guidelines about how we can deal with people, how we can deal with our clients sat in front of us. Now I'm going to suggest unless you're very unlucky you're not going to be dealing with a murderer or a hardened criminal and if you are, well maybe that one doesn't apply. Maybe there was a positive intent to them behind it, we don't know that. This is an idea of that person in front of you giving them some space, giving them some unconditional positive regard and knowing that they are not their behaviors. Maybe that would have been a better way to phrase that one. The people we meet, every single person in the world is not their behaviors, they are not the behaviors they exhibit. They are a person inside, they have a core identity which interestingly will come to towards the end of the course but they are not the behaviors they exhibit. So does every behavior have a positive intent? Well what if we could find a positive intent behind those behaviors? We're not talking about murderers and hardened criminals, we're talking about a client that comes to you, that is exhibiting a behavior of anger or frustration or something along that lines. What if we could find a positive intent behind it? What if their positive intent was simply to protect themselves or to protect their family? What if there was a positive intent behind it we could find and then use that positive intent to bring them out of that anger and frustration and give them more options? Well that's certainly something we're going to look at later on in the course about how to do that. So this isn't a rule that's set in stone, this is a guideline and it's great to take that stance with a client that even when they say look I've come here for your help and I just exhibit this behavior I get so frustrated with my wife, husband, kids, everybody and you for you to sit there and go okay tell me more about that. What's your reason behind that? What's your intent for doing that? What's the purpose behind that behavior? Because you give them that unconditional positive regard and then you give them that space to talk, you give them the opportunity to work it through for themselves because they will never thought they will have never thought about that. Okay let's move on to the unconscious balances the conscious. Some people think that the unconscious mind is malicious, they think it's there to upset us, it's there to stop us, it's there to hold us back, it's not at all. All the unconscious does is balances the conscious mind. Yes it'll throw some stuff up, yes it's got a whole bunch of beliefs sat in the back there that it believes is true but the unconscious mind doesn't have a filter the same as a conscious mind. The unconscious mind takes all the information in and then does its best to protect us, does its best to offer us guidance about how to stop ourselves getting hurt or how to deal with fear or how not to get upset. That's what the unconscious mind does. The conscious mind is there to think about stuff logically, to try and think its way past stuff, to move us forwards. The unconscious mind is there to balance it out, to say whoa slow down here. The trouble with the unconscious mind is as I said it has no filter so it just gives us information that it thinks is right but it's probably outdated. Most of our beliefs that hold us back, our limiting irrational beliefs, are we're born way way many years ago when we were just young and that limiting belief is of no longer of benefit to us. It had a benefit at its time whatever that may have been but it no longer does but the unconscious mind keeps it there because at that point wherever that limiting belief was born there was a great deal of fear or upset or something that's this massive emotion that stops us ever wanting to feel that again and that's what the unconscious mind is trying to do. But as I said previously when we bring stuff consciously, when we awaken the conscious mind and we take conscious responsibility for life, then we can start to move past that stuff and the conscious and unconscious mind really does balance. At the moment I'm going to suggest that a significant part of the world, a significant part of the population of the world, live more in their own conscious than they do in their conscious. When a client comes to you and has a limiting belief there's a good chance they're living more in their own conscious than they are conscious. When we bring stuff to the conscious we can then consciously start to change it but there is that balance and that unconscious will always be there. The final one for this clip, the meaning of communication is also the response you get. This is a tough one for people to understand because I say this and people go hang on a minute Graham so what I say the response that other person gives me that's my problem? No that's their problem they've reacted to it they've chosen to get angry or they've chosen to get upset or they've chosen to be happy or that's not down to me well yeah it is. Because if the response you get isn't the response you were expecting then maybe just maybe you haven't explained that communication well enough maybe you haven't communicated well enough to get your point across. If that response you get is upset, anger, frustration when you were expecting happiness or joy there is something wrong with your communication. Now for me I sit here and I stand here and I think to myself yeah there are times in my life when people have reacted because they've taken things the wrong way and then if I properly reflect backwards and I think to myself is it because they've taken things in the wrong way or is it because I've worded it in the wrong way? The inflection in my voice was wrong I've said the wrong word here or there I've done something wrong the volume was wrong the timbre the timbre in my voice was wrong have I not communicated it properly and the truth probably is that I have if ever my wife and I get into a heated discussion shall we say I will often go well hang on a minute there so what's going on here have I not communicated properly to you? Maybe I've said that wrong how did that come across to you and she'll say well it came across like this and I'll go ah okay then I didn't put it across properly my apologies. Sometimes she'll say something and I'll take it wrong and to start with I'll probably go oh wait a minute I'm sure that's not how you meant that to come across could you just tell me a bit more about that so that it comes across better? That's what we do that's what as human beings we need to do please remember that when clients are trying to explain stuff to you they won't have the words sometimes you have to give them that space that unconditional positive regard that belief that maybe their communication skills aren't as strong as yours give them the space to explain it properly use your questions your intuition your thoughts just to bring that information out of them and get to understand them as much as possible but when you communicate to them when you are trying to get something across to them it's absolutely up to you to explain it fully to communicate properly so that they understand. Okay fantastic we've come to the end of this clip let's go and look at part number three of the presuppositions in the next clip I'll see you there bye for now you