 So let's move on and finish off these presuppositions. The last five start with, we all have the resources we need or we can create them. Now when I'm talking about resources here, I'm talking about anything you need to move forward with your life, anything you need to get on with your life, anything you need to succeed. So you might come, or people might come to you as clients and say, I just don't have the time. Well time is a resource. Now it is a limited resource because we are limited to 24 hours a day. However, we can create time if we need to. We can take time from other places and other things we're doing if we need to. We can wake up an hour earlier or go to bed an hour later at night if we really need to. We can stop doing some of the things that we are doing to give time to something else if we need to. People who say, I just don't have enough time, are just looking to stop themselves. That's the truth of it. They're looking, they're finding a way probably unconsciously to stop themselves and they haven't taken the time to look at their lives as a whole and see where they can pick points from. Now we're going to do a lot of work with timelines later on in the course and I love working with timelines and how time fits with our lives. So we're going to do a lot of section of that course. Other resources, well I don't have the money, well can you create the money? Can you get a different job that's better paying? Can you get a second job? How can you make more money? Now I'm not talking about robbing a bank or going and sticking up the corner store or anything like that. How can you create more money? We can if it was life or death could you do it? And that's possibly a good question to ask when people come to you and say I don't have a resource, time, money, energy, anything along those lines and yes energy is a resource as well. If it was a life or death situation, if somebody had got a gun to your head and said if in the next 48 hours you don't find enough of this resource I'm going to pull this trigger, what would you do? Absolutely blumming everything to find that resource wouldn't you? You would do your best to find the time, to find the energy, to find the money or to find whatever resource you could. So we have all the resources we need, all we can create them is a key presupposition and you will get people who maybe they didn't come to you with that but when you're setting them goals then they might just say I'm not sure I have the time for that. That's about limiting their own resources. The next one on the list is mind and body form a system. They are different expressions of the same person. You see for so long and you've possibly come across it yourself, for so long people in the psychotherapy, psychoanalyst world, the psychologists, the counsellors and therapists thought there was a big disconnect between what the mind does and what the body does. They thought they were two separate entities. In fact you'll find in some counselling and therapists these days they still think the same. We as a culture, as a generalisation around the world still think that things like depression and anxiety and stress are mental health conditions. In other words they are only in the mind, they are only a mentality. What utter rubbish. If you've ever suffered with depression or stress or anxiety and have, I know it, there are physical symptoms that come along as well. But they're not just symptoms, they are physical reactions, they are physiological reactions to how you're feeling. And how you're feeling can be created just as much from those physiological reactions as they come from your mind. When we get to the section on purpose you'll understand why I'm so passionate about this part. Because I've suffered with these conditions and because I was fed a whole bunch of rubbish to save myself from swearing, I'll use the word rubbish, but because I went and found out about these conditions I now know that that's rubbish. It's not a mental health condition. That assumes it's just in the mentality, in the mind. And it's not. Mind and body form a connection. They're just different expressions of who we are. We express ourselves through our mind, through talking, but we also express ourselves through our bodies, through our actions and behaviours. And the mind and body are connected. In fact these days it is scientifically proven that mind and body are connected and has been so since the late 1970s. If you've not ever read the work of Dr Candice Pertt I suggest you go and look it up. She was the first person to actually scientifically prove the connection between mind and body. So mind and body are completely interconnected and what we do with one affects the other and vice versa. When we get to looking at states later on in the course of emotional states we'll do a lot more work on that. The next presupposition is we process all of the information that comes at us through our senses. Now if you think about it that makes perfect sense. We either hear something or we see something or we feel and touch something. We taste something or we smell something. There is no other way we experience anything, anything in this world. I'll take you back to the first presupposition of the map is not the territory. The reason that our map is our own reality but it's not the reality of what's out there is because it's all taken in through our senses. How we see things, how we hear things, how we taste, how we smell and how we feel things is different to everybody else's. So we experience everything through our senses. Until I mentioned it you probably didn't realise that your big toe is rubbing on your sock or your shoe or your slipper. Actually that information is always there. It's another sense, it's the feel, it's the touch sense. But our minds block it out because it's not information we need. But it's there if we want it. If you were to rub your big toe on your right foot against your shoe or your slip or your sock or whatever you're standing on all of a sudden there's a sensation there that you didn't notice before. We take everything in through that. You at the moment are taking information in through your sight and through your hearing. For me, as we go through this course I'm going to get you to try and feel those emotions as well so that you take it in through another sense. Unfortunately I can't get you to taste and smell stuff that's sitting here in my office. As much as the coffee that's bubbling away in the back corner of the office there smells good I can't pass that through to you. So moving on. Now this one's a key one for me. This is the part that I think a lot of NLP trainings these days miss out on. I've mentioned this already. Modelling successful performance leads to excellence. Now when that was first created that was because Bandler and Grinder were modelling excellence. They were modelling top performers in their categories. The Milton Ericsons, the Virginia Satiers, the Fritz Pearls. They were modelling excellence. They were modelling success and that brought about excellence. So that's what they looked at. However for me modelling goes a lot deeper than that. I'm going to talk about it in a few videos time so that we can really understand it but when we model our clients and what our clients are doing we are discovering what they're doing and then we can change the model. That is what NLP is at its core. It's finding out what somebody's doing, changing what they're doing to get a different result. There you go that's NLP explained in one hit. Thank you very much I'm off. Goodbye. You're now a master practitioner. It doesn't work quite that easily but that's the truth of it. Remember when I said about the conscious and unconscious mind that so much goes on in the unconscious mind that we don't know about but when we bring it to the conscious we can then change it. That's what modelling does. It brings out the patterns and the behaviours that are going on unconsciously and we discover how they're working so that we can change how they're working and therefore we can change what's going on. That's the power of modelling. I can't stress it enough but we're going to go through that as I say in a few videos And finally if you want to understand, act. Now we'll go back to the very first section when I drew the learning circle on the board here I'm sure you remember it and I went on and on and on about practice. That says everything it needs to. If you want to understand something, if you want to understand something, act on it, practice it, go forward with it. If you want to understand another person then model their actions to get understanding. Model their actions to get understanding. Model what is going on with them in their behaviours, in their language, you get understanding of them. More importantly though they get understanding of their selves and that's when we create change. But for the purposes of this course, that word there, act, is key to you because you need to act. You need to act on the experiences and the exercises that come along in this course and you need to practice. You're going to hear me say the words practice makes you more natural several times through this course and I'm not going to apologise for that because it's the truth and you want to appear as natural as you possibly can when you're sat in front of a client trying to help them because if it comes naturally to you it will help them. So I want to throw one more in that doesn't appear in the usual NLP presuppositions. I want to throw in one more thing to help you out and that is the fact that nobody in this world is broken. We might all have chinks in our armour, none of us are perfect, but nobody's broken and with all the stuff you're about to learn about NLP you can't break anybody either. There are options for the information to be used in a non-ethical way shall we say. I'm not going to give you those options. That's not what NLP was designed for. Yes, NLP, some people use NLP in non-ethical ways but that's not what NLP was designed for. NLP was designed to help people. That's what we're going to concentrate on in this course. So when you've got a client in front of you and all the way through this course I just want you to remember that nobody is broken. You and me we're not broken. We have chinks in our armour, yes because nobody's perfect, but also you can't break anybody with this information. You can help them or they can choose to stay where they are, you can't break anybody with it. Nobody's broken and you can't break anybody. They don't need fixing in the first place because they're not broken. Okay, let's carry on into the next clip now that we've cleared through the presuppositions. I'll see you there. Bye for now.